My history with computers

My very first experience with computers was at school #13 in Chisinau, Moldova, back in 1987 I think. School had a classroom with Agat computers, probably Agat-7. Agat-7 was a bulgarian built clone of Apple II. I remember having "Informatics" class once a week, and we would type in a basic program that teacher supplied, run it, then we'd be allowed to play a few minutes of Xonix or an artillery game similar Worms, all in glorious ascii. I would've loved to have more access, but teacher would only allow "wunderkinds", coincidently all from the same ethnic background as herself. It was one of the first times I felt I'm of the "wrong" etnicity. This put me off computers, as I was associating them with being inferior and not intelligent enough.

About a year my family moved back to Surgut, I rejoined my previous school #16 and even the same class as I was attending two years prior. This school mostly cattered to chikdren from the lower socio-economic classes, and as such didn't had any computers. I do remember going with some of my classmates to a gaming room in nearby mall. It was called "cultural house" (dom kul'tury). Perestroika was in full swing, but old communist labels and pretences were still around. The gaming room had may be 6 or 8 Atari 8-bit computers. You could buy 30 minutes of play time for 5 rubles, which was about two weeks worth of allowance. I paid my 5 rubles, operator loaded River Ride for me, I got to play it for about 3 or 4 minutes, after wich operator guy told me my 30 minutes are over and I can pay up more or scram. I had my handwatch by that time and I knew I'm being screwed, so I got really pissed, told the operator he's a liar and left. That was it with computers for another two years.

In summer of 1990 I was done with middle school and was about to start first of the two years of high school. In USSR, every pupil had to do a kind of co-op program that would teach you some useful work skills. It was called UPK (Uchebno-proizvodstvennaya praktika, or study at work practice). I went to nearby UPK center with my classmates and tried hard to apply for a driving class, but was rejected, probably because of poor vision. So was one of my classmates, Vlad. He found some paid courses on programming that would count as valid UPK class. It was in Mitrofanov's excellent North Star education center. This is where we got access to diskless Yamaha KUVT 503RII MSX-2 computers with green monochrome displays, joined in a local network using serial MIDI-like interface. There was also a "teacher's" Yamaha KUVT 805RII computer with beautiful EIZO RGB monitor and a mouse. This computer had two 3.5" DD floppy drives and was used as a server that sent Turbo Pascal 3 or games to student computers as well as copied back any Pascal programs we saved on ram disk on student computer. This place, time, peers and teachers were really amazing. We were given assignments and very little supervision, we could look at some sample programs and cooperate to discover new features and techniques. In a week, I had my first pascal program that I wrote start to finish and understood intimately. It was printing multiplication table on screen. Nothing special but a huge breakthrough for someone who just started learning their first programming language. A library book on USCD pascal was a huge help. I wish I'd remember author's name or title. I just kind of remember the front cover design, black and white, with soome geomertical patterns. In a few months we were all very good with Turbo Pascal, Metal Gear (very first from 1987), Kid Wiz and Zanac Ex. Some kids who started a year or more before us where diehard Rapira fanatics. It was a very advanced programming environment for Agat-7 and Agat-9 computers. I never got into that. In my mind, MSX-2 and Turbo Pascal were lightyears ahead in usability and productivity. I also ignored the lonely Korvet computer we had. My interest in MSX-2 was absolute until the day North Star bought a bunch of brand new shiny IBM PC AT clones near the end of 1990. Running at 12MHz, with color VGA display and mouse, they seemed absolutely insane. MSX-2 was promptly forgotten, on PC, we got Turbo Pascal 5.0, promptly upgraded to 6.0 in early 1991.
[first floppy, unkle summer 1990 visit, gymnasium, ne i ni]